# NOTES ON EMBEDDED OPERATING SYSTEMS.

# KERNEL ARCHITECTURES

 - Monolitic
 - Microkernel
 - Modular
 

# [CONTIKI](http://www.contiki-os.org/)

This OS is intended for IoT devices. It uses a modular kernel.

It was created by Adam Dunkels  in 2002, and its Open Source. It is specifically designed for network and memory constrained systems. It's main focus is in low power wireless sensor systems and Internet-of-Things devices. So is a lightweight OS, enought to comply the requirements of an embedded device, with small memory and battery powered. Its footprint is about 10kb of RAM, and 30kb of ROM.

- It uses protothreads, software flow control.- protothreads, is a mechanism that mixes an event-driven model and threads, to provide a sequential flow control without using complex state machines.

- It has a full TPC/IP implementations stack.- Includes IPv4 and IPv6

- It also supports low power wireless standards as: 6LoWPAN, RPL, and CoAP.

- It also provides mechanims for efficient memory allocation.

- It is based in a modular kernel, that supports dynamic module loading and linking at run-time.

- It has a mechanism for estimating the system's power consumpiton.

- It supports several hardware devices.

- It is easy to port Contiki to new harware, with little effort.

- To rapid implementation of wireless networks, it provides the Cojaa Network Simulator.

- It has a Command Line Shell suitable for debugging applications.

Reference: http://www.contiki-os.org/



# TinyOS

Is another Iot embedded OS. It is open-source. It has a monolitic kernel.

It is designed for network and constrained systems. It is lightweight.

Created in 1999 by Berkeley University. 

TinyOS, and it's applications are written using nesC. NesC is a structured component based extension of C languaje. 

It has a minimal footprint.

It runs with a simple scheduler based on death-lines.

It allows debugging, and support race condition detections.

It is based on active messages, that are the main comunication abstraction model of TinyOS.

The main code of TinyOS consists on 401 components.

Supports low power operations.



## Basics concepts of nesC

- Separation of construction and composition. All programs in TinyOS, are build as components, and then assembled as a whole program.
- Components, have internal concurrency on the form of tasks. A component is called via it's interface.
- Specification of component behavior using a set of interfaces.
- Bidirectional interfaces. That means that intefaces provides functions with both: commands and events.
- Statically linking of components, via interfaces.
- Generated by a whole program compiler.



